Add postmortem (#12588)
department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team: products/public-websites/cerner/postmortem/missing-content-schedule-appt-page.md

When the PR was deployed at 3:15pm EST, Danielle Thierry then discovered it at 4:05pm EST. (2:05pm MST = 4:05pm EST)

![Discovery message](./discovery.png)

Traffic was almost immediately observed to go down to 0 for VAOS:

![Grafana](./grafana.png)

When Danielle raised the issue to Kelson Adams, Kelson opened up the dev console on the page [www.va.gov/health-care/schedule-view-va-appointments](https://www.va.gov/health-care/schedule-view-va-appointments/) and found that there was a runtime error with the common `<Telephone />` component on that page where there was a missing prop called `pattern` that is _ONLY_ required for 3-digit phone numbers (in this case, it was TTY 711 numbers). A [PR was sent up to fix this](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/pull/13896) 5 minutes later at 4:10pm EST. The PR was approved by VSP and merged at 5pm EST.

An [off-schedule deploy was requested](https://dsva.slack.com/archives/CBU0KDSB1/p1597695472119100?thread_ts=1597695207.118200&cid=CBU0KDSB1) at 4:17pm EST, which was then executed at 5:52pm EST. Following the fix being deployed at that time, traffic resumed as normal to VAOS.

## Background

> 
> A request was made to update the current content on the page [www.va.gov/health-care/schedule-view-va-appointments](https://www.va.gov/health-care/schedule-view-va-appointments/) with [this GitHub comment](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team/issues/12446#issuecomment-674324572).
> 
> > we separately need to update the legacy content for this schedule and view appointments page for the Monday 8.17 deploy. The VA appointments tool is adding community care appointments that day, but we won't be quite ready to just switch to the unauthenticated Cerner content. I'm attaching the needed changes to the legacy page. Can you update these or show me how to update Monday morning? Thank you!
> 
> [This request](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team/issues/12446#issuecomment-674324572)

Reviewer: I think we can zoom out here a little to describe how FE code is essentially the whole page, which I think is why this is so complex.

```suggestion
`/health-care/schedule-view-va-appointments/` serves as a gateway to the VA Online Scheduling health care application. The content on the page is housed largely in vets-website as a React widget. The reason for this is that the page content has various states based on the user's authentication status and whether the user's facilities are registered in the upcoming Cerner health care launch. This results in a fair amount of frontend logic, and means that a change to the content on that page has to be coordinated between a VA.gov writer and a frontend engineer in order to be written correctly and published at the correct time.

Via a [GitHub comment]([this GitHub comment](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team/issues/12446#issuecomment-674324572)), a request was made to a frontend engineer on the VSA Public Websites team to update the content on the scheduling page to promote new functionality offered by VAOS. The Public Websites team opened a pull request containing the latest content, unknowingly creating a runtime error deep in the application code. 
```

## Detection
_How was the issue found?_ It was found by Danielle Thierry.

![Discovery message](./discovery.png)

_Date/time of discovery_ 4:05pm EST

## Impact

_What was the impact on Veterans, business and team?_

> All traffic to VAOS from [www.va.gov/health-care/schedule-view-va-appointments](https://www.va.gov/health-care/schedule-view-va-appointments/) ceased from 3:15pm EST to 5:52pm EST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `/health-care/schedule-view-va-appointments` serves as the gateway to VA Online Scheduling and was unavailable, traffic to VAOS from ceased from 3:15pm EST to 5:52pm EST.
```

## Root Causes

_What caused this situation?_

This situation was caused by 2 3-digit TTY 711 numbers that were using the `formation-react` `<Telephone />` component. These components required a prop called `pattern` that was not present, causing a runtime error, which resulted in the React widget not rendering.

## Resolution
_What steps were taken to resolve the issue?_ A PR that added the `pattern` prop to both `<Telephone />` components and an off-schedule deploy.

_Date/time of resolution_ At 5:52pm EST on August 17, 2020.

## Documentation links

- [Original PR with bug](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/pull/13882)
- [PR with bug fix](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/vets-website/pull/13896)
- [Slack discussion in #vfs-platform-support with request of off-schedule deploy](https://dsva.slack.com/archives/CBU0KDSB1/p1597695207118200)
- [Slack discussion in #vsa-public-websites](https://dsva.slack.com/archives/C52CL1PKQ/p1597695037082300)

## Action Items

| Description                    | Type    | Owner        | Issue # |
| ------------------------------ | ------- | ------------ | ------- |

> | Brainstorm alternatives of storing authenticated content in React widgets as opposed to Drupal | Frontend | Public Websites / CMS | Ticket not created yet |

Reviewer: I still don't understand who really owns or has say in how this content is written because I think there are issues with having a whole page of content transform based on user status. I've long wondered if this is acceptable for screen readers. 

Anyway, point being that I think it's okay to store authenticated content in React as long as that content is "containerized" so that only a certain subset of the page transforms.

| Implement some form of smoke tests for website templates | Frontend | TBD | https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-team/issues/12445 |
| Write unit tests that do not shallow render components for the Cerner page React widgets (the runtime error would have been caught this way). This may be a good use-case for React Testing Library. | Frontend | Public Websites | Ticket not created yet |
| Fix `formation-react`'s `<Telephone />` component's `pattern` prop to inherently support 3-digit numbers without a prop needing to be passed in. | Frontend | TBD | Ticket not created yet |

## Lessons Learned

We need increased quality assurance, perhaps as a high-level form of smoke test, that runs against the CMS templates of the website, to ensure certain components and elements exist on key pages.

### What went well

Root cause was discovered and resolved quickly once the issue was noticed.

### What went wrong

> There was an hour gap between the time the PR was merged and the deployment. This was due to needing an off-schedule deployment authorization after hours and not having immediate knowledge of backup authorizers when one authorizer isn't available after hours.

Reviewer: Yeah, it was a little odd that we didn't feel in control of our own recovery

### Where we got lucky

Deployment resolving the issue when very smoothly and the involved engineers on VSA and VSP were all very supportive.

### Takeaways

> We have long identified the content templates of the FE code to need better test coverage, and this issue demonstrates the increasing importance as we continue to scale.

Reviewer: This is sort of outside of templates in that it's a React widget but it is similar. We would typically perform tests at a high-level via e2e tests but couldn't because it had the Drupal page as a dependency. I think a collection of unit tests that do full, deep renders of the React component trees across our FE widgets would be a useful precedent to set.
